# UTCG Shaders Workshop

## Intro

### What is a shader?

A *pixel shader* (aka *fragment shader*) is code that runs for each pixel being rendered. There are other types of shaders (e.g. vertex shaders, geometry shaders, etc) but we won't cover them today. Generally, they're code that runs on the GPU, usually for rendering graphics. GPUs are great for shaders, because they're made for doing similar work for lots of different inputs - in this case, they'll run the same shader code for each pixel on the screen.

## Fragment shader basics - Mandelbrot set

To learn the basics, let's start by rendering the [Mandelbrot set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mandelbrot_set). Here's some [starter code](https://www.shadertoy.com/view/NdsyDX) - we won't be paying much attention to the math, so the `mandel()` function is provided.

### What are we doing?

Our fragment shader's input is a pixel on the screen and its output is its colour, as a 4D RGBA vector - that's Red/Green/Blue/Alpha.

```glsl
void mainImage( out vec4 fragColor, in vec2 fragCoord )
{
	...
}
```

...

[put in rest of mandel stuff]

## Rotation, Time, and Circles - Analogue Clock

Our next example is an analogue clock. Here's some [starter code](https://www.shadertoy.com/view/fdlyz2) - we've created a `uv` variable for you, to give you the coordinates of the pixel from the centre of the screen. Here's the [finished shader](https://www.shadertoy.com/view/fslcR2) for reference.

### Creating the clock face

Clocks are circles. This is basic anthropology. But what is a circle?

A circle is all the points within some radius $r$ of the centre of the circle $\mathbf c$. So if we have a pixel whose coordinates are $\mathbf p = (x, y)$, then we can check if the pixel is within the circle by checking if $\text{length}(\mathbf p - \mathbf c) < r$. Let's do that in our code.

Let's set the centre of our clock to be the centre of the screen, and give it a radius of 0.4:

```glsl
vec2 clockCentre = vec2(0, 0);
float clockRadius = 0.4;
```

And now, let's use the GLSL `length` function to implement the circle formula and colour the clock face red:

```
if (length(uv - clockCentre) < clockRadius)
{
	col = vec3(1., 0.5, 0.5);
}
```

If you render now, you should see a big red circle in the middle of the screen!

### Initializing the seconds hand

The initial position of a clock hand, at time 0 is pointing straight up, so let's create an `up` vector to represent that:

```glsl
vec2 up = vec2(0, 0.2);
```

Now let's render it as a small white dot, the same way we rendered the clock face:

```glsl
vec2 secondsHand = up;

float handRadius = 0.02;

// put the following code AFTER the clock face colour code

if (length(uv - secondsHand) < handRadius)
{
	col = vec3(1, 1, 1);
}
```

### Making it move

Using linear algebra, we've created a `rot()` function which returns a matrix that will rotate a 2D vector clockwise by a given angle in radians ([more on rotation matrices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotation_matrix). To get a rotated vector, you multiply a rotation matrix times a vector. For example,

```glsl
vec2 northEast = vec2(1, 1);
vec2 southEast = rot(0.5 * M_PI) * northEast;
```

In our case, we want to rotate our clock hand by some angle based on time. GLSL gives us a handy variable `iTime`, which is the time in seconds since we started the shader. Let's try it out by editing our seconds hand's position:

```glsl
vec2 secondsHand = rot(iTime) * up;
```

### Getting the speed right

Great, it's rotating! But it's the wrong speed. One full rotation is $2\pi$ (aka `2. * M_PI`) radians, and it takes 60 seconds, so we'll rotate our seconds hand correspondingly:

```glsl
float seconds = iTime;

vec2 secondsHand = rot(seconds / 60. * 2. * M_PI) * up;  // 60 seconds for a rotation
```

Now we have a seconds hand! Let's try a minutes hand next, using the same strategy:

```glsl
float minutes = seconds / 60.

vec2 minutesHand = rot(minutes / 60. * 2. * M_PI) * up;  // 60 mins for a rotation

...

if (length(uv - minutesHand) < handRadius)
{
	col = vec3(1, 1, 1);
}
```

Try doing an hour hand yourself!

### Extras

To make it even more clock-like, see if you can use the GLSL `floor()` function to make the seconds hand "tick" instead of rotating smoothly.

You can also make it look better by changing the lengths of the hands, so that they never overlap.

Another aesthetic upgrade might be a bezel, or patterns on the clock face. Numbers are a bit more difficult, but look into textures if you have some time and wanna try it out.
