# UDesign x UTCG Workshop

Here's the git repo for this part of the workshop. Please clone/download it, so that you can use the starter code! [https://github.com/UTCG/udesign-globe](https://github.com/UTCG/udesign-globe)

## Running the site

In order to avoid the notorious [CORS errors](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS/Errors), we need to serve our website from a web server instead of just opening the HTML page in a browser from our file system. Luckily, this is easy!

If you already have Python installed, you can simply go to the directory that stores your `index.html` and run the command `python3 -m http.server` (or `python -m SimpleHTTPServer` if you're using Python 2). Then your website will be live at `http://localhost:8000/index.html`.

If you have [VS Code]() installed, you can also use the `ritwickdey.LiveServer` extension.

[Here's](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/set_up_a_local_testing_server) some more info on running a local web server.

You should see an empty page with a gradient background that has no console errors.

While working on this page, remember to save your code and refresh every time you want to see your changes!

## Setting up a scene

Every scene made with three.js has a few basic objects.

- the Scene ([THREE.Scene](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=scene#api/en/scenes/Scene)
  - This is a representation of all the 3D objects within our scene.
- our object [Group](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=group#api/en/objects/Group)
  - We'll put our main objects in this group, so that we can access them outside of our init function and update their properties later, i.e. if we want to move them around.
- the [Renderer](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=renderer#api/en/renderers/WebGLRenderer)
  - This is responsible for taking our 3D scene and camera and outputting an image to the screen
- the [Camera](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=camera#api/en/cameras/PerspectiveCamera)
  - This is our view into the scene
  - We'll initialize it using [OrbitControls](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=orbitcontr#examples/en/controls/OrbitControls) so that we revolve around our scene

We'll define global variables for these objects for convenience, and initialize them inside our `init()` function based on our screen size.

```javascript
// necessary global objects
var scene;
var renderer;
var camera;

// objects in the scene that we want to access outside of init
var group;

...

function init() {
    // basic scene objects
    scene = new THREE.Scene();
    renderer = new THREE.WebGLRenderer({ antialias: true, alpha: true });
    renderer.setSize(window.innerWidth, window.innerHeight);
    renderer.setPixelRatio(window.devicePixelRatio);
    document.body.appendChild(renderer.domElement);

    // set up camera
    camera = new THREE.PerspectiveCamera(75, window.innerWidth / window.innerHeight, 0.1, 1000);
    const controls = new OrbitControls(camera, renderer.domElement);
    camera.position.z = 3;
    scene.add(camera)

    // group of all of the objects we want to render in our scene
    group = new THREE.Group();
    scene.add(group);

    ...

}
```

In particular, notice that we add objects to our scene using `scene.add(object)`. We'll similarly add objects to our group with `group.add(object)`, and we can even add objects to other object. More on this later!

## Setting up animation

An animation happens when we render a different image at every frame. In JavaScript, to get a smooth animation, we must repeatedly call the `requestAnimationFrame` function to ask it to render again as soon as possible. So our animate function will look like this:

```javascript
function animate() {
    // request for animate() to be called again next frame
    requestAnimationFrame(animate);
    renderer.render(scene, camera);
}
```

Now we can get our scene up and running:

```javascript
init();
animate();
```

## Adding a terrible sphere

Let's try adding a really bad sphere and see what happens. That way, we'll see our improvements when we add lighting, increase the geometry resolution, and add textures.

What we need to add to our scene is a [Mesh](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=mesh#api/en/objects/Mesh), which is an object that can be rendered. A mesh requires a geometry, aka a shape, and a material, aka how it looks.

For our geometry, we'll make a [SphereGeometry](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=geometry#api/en/geometries/SphereGeometry). The constructor takes arguments for its radius, the number of segments it uses along its width, and the number of segments it uses along its height. Let's give it a raidus of `1` for simplicity, and `5` segments in each direction, so that it looks chunky for now.

For our material, we'll make a simple [MeshStandardMaterial](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=geometry#api/en/geometries/SphereGeometry). We'll add some more fancy features to it later.

Now we can make our "sphere" mesh and add it to our scene:

```javascript
const geometry = new THREE.SphereGeometry(1, 5, 5);
const material = new THREE.MeshStandardMaterial();
const sphere = new THREE.Mesh(geometry, material);
group.add(sphere);
```

Now you should see a weird chunky dark thing on your screen. Why is it pitch black? Because we don't have any lighting yet! Let's add that next.

## Adding some lighting

The most basic type of lighting we can add is [ambient lighting](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=ambient#api/en/lights/AmbientLight), which adds a little bit of light to everything in the scene equally. This mimics how a little bit of light bounces around everywhere when we're not in a pitch-black room, though there is no such thing as ambient lighting in real life. To add ambient lighting, all we need to do is choose its colour and add it to the scene. (Feel free to mess around with its colour!)

```javascript
const ambientLight = new THREE.AmbientLight(0x404040); // soft white light
scene.add(ambientLight);
```

Now our sphere is no longer pitch-black! Let's make even more interesting lighting though, by adding... the sun! In real life, the sun is so far away that it feels less like a point light and more like light coming from a certain direction, so we'll use a [DirectionalLight](https://threejs.org/docs/?q=direction#api/en/lights/DirectionalLight). Feel free to position it how you want, but we'll give you some coordinates that look okay for us. Once we position the light, we'll make it point at our sphere by setting its `target`.

```javascript
const sun = new THREE.DirectionalLight(0xffffff, 2);  // colour and intensity
sun.target = sphere;  // point at sphere
sun.position.set(7, 10, 7);  // move right, up, forward
scene.add(sun);
```

Now we have a nice, thoroughly illuminated, white potato! Congrats!

## Returning to the sphere - materials and resolution

To make our sphere look more sphere-y, let's increase its geometry resolution. We can do this by changing its segment parameters from 5 up to a bigger number, so that it's less blocky.

```javascript
const geometry = new THREE.SphereGeometry(1, 40, 40);  // 40 segments in each direction
```

Let's also make it into a globe, by giving it a texture. We got our textures from [this](http://planetpixelemporium.com/earth.html) website, we downloaded their 1K versions, but feel free to find your own. What we really need is a colour map (aka what we normally call a texture) and a bump map.

We can load them onto our sphere by modifying our Material object to load a `map` and a `bumpMap`:

```javascript
const material = new THREE.MeshStandardMaterial({
    map: new THREE.TextureLoader().load('./img/globe.jpg'),
    bumpMap: new THREE.TextureLoader().load('./img/earthbump1k.jpg'),
    bumpScale: 0.05,  // how bumpy our bump map will make our sphere
});
```

Now our sphere should look like the earth! If you're curious what the bump map is doing, I recommend you remove the image texture and take a look. The purpose of the bump map is to make the sphere look bumpy, and react to the ligthing as if it has the geometry of the texture (e.g. the mountains and valleys on earth), but without us having to change the actual geometry of our mesh. So our sphere is still geometrically a sphere, but it reflects light as if it's bumpy!

### Extra: making the sun follow our camera around

Now that our Earth looks cool, we might wanna revolve around and look at every little bit of it. But some parts are pretty dark. It's pretty frustrating trying to look at the parts where the sun don't shine, so let's make our sun follow our camera around. We can do this by adding the sun to the `camera` object instead of the `scene` object, so that the camera is the "parent" pulling the sun around with it like a kid at Home Depot.

```javascript
const sun = ...
// scene.add(sun);  // fixed sun
camera.add(sun);    // sun follows camera
```

### Extra: Making the sphere rotate

I think it'll be pretty cool if the Earth was slowly rotating, so let's add that in. All we need to do is update our `animate()` function to rotate our object group:

```javascript
function animate() {
    ...

    group.rotation.y += 0.0025;
}
```

We increment the y-axis rotation because this will make it revolve around the vertical axis. You can imagine a skewer sticking through the Earth vertically, and spinning it around on that axis.

## Adding simple markers for places

Let's add markers to our globe to point out some important places. Why are these places important? You'll see at 4:36 AM GMT on July 26th 2025!

We've made the `addMarker()` function to do most of this for you, though we left out the actual marker. For simplicity, let's make it a sphere. But since it'll be intersecting the surface of the Earth, it'll look like a half-sphere, which looks kinda cool.

```javascript
let mesh = new THREE.Mesh(
    new THREE.SphereGeometry(0.015, 20, 20),  // tiny and round
    new THREE.MeshStandardMaterial({ color: markerColor })
);
```

Now we can add our markers by simply specifying their names, locations, and colours.

```javascript
// add markers to cool cities
addMarker('Ottawa', 45.4215, -75.6972, 0xff0000, font, group);
addMarker('Nairobi', -1.286389, 36.817223, 0x0000ff, font, group);
addMarker('Rio de Janeiro', -22.908333, -43.196388, 0x00ff00, font, group);
```

We chose some wacky colours here, but try changing them all to black for a sleeker look.

## Fin

That's our basic globe widget! It was inspired particularly by the one on the [GitHub homepage](https://github.com/home), though we didn't go through the same [process](https://github.blog/2020-12-21-how-we-built-the-github-globe/) since that's kinda insane. Though you can definitely get results that look pretty good using better choice in textures, messing with lighting, and maybe adding your own shaders.

Thanks for following along!
